14 Must-Have Books for Behavior Data Scientists
===============================================

:date: 2015-10-15
:author: Xiaming Chen
:tags: HumanMobility


.. image:: http://7xlgp4.com1.z0.glb.clouddn.com/must_have.png
    :alt: must-have-banner
    :scale: 90%
    :target: http://7xlgp4.com1.z0.glb.clouddn.com/must_have.png


In my Ph.D career, human behavior (especially mobility) analysis from
telecommunication data is my studying theme.  I learned a bunch of theories and
techniques from other domains when they are of convenience to analyze human
mobility.  As for the intrinsic complexity of human behavior and intersection
of behavior science, tools you should have in package are usually not a hammer
but a flexible toolkit.  Different problems prefer specific classes of methods
to solve. When you change views of the same problem with other theories, novel
inspections may appear.  Here I introduce a mostly-related book list that is
beneficial when you are either a green hand or an expert in the domain.

**Statistics for Behavior Science**


For a data scientist, statistics is primary in the toolkit. You use
distribution to know the scale and variance of collected data. You also need
hypothesis tests to check the significance of derived conclusions. Sometimes
dataset is of small size as for high cost of data acquisition, sampling theory
in statistics is essential to achieve a reliable result with limited
observations.  Heiman made a basic theoretical package for these goals.

- Gary W. Heiman. *Basic Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences*, 7th ed. 2013.

If you are looking for a more practical explanation, McCall's work may deserve
your attention.

- Robert B. McCall. *Fundamental Statistics for Behavioral Sciences*. 8th
  ed. 2000.


**Spatio-Temporal Data Analysis**

One theoretical source of behavior science comes from physical statistics and
thermodynamics, as a result of viewing mobile individuals as physical
particles. A branch of concept and algorithms are introduced in this
philosophy. With this individual-particle transformation, we get an opportunity
to find more general and objective rules that govern human mobility. Cressie et
al. made great contributions on this topic.  Two valuable books are preferred
when I consider human behavior spatially or by coupling space and time.

- Cressie, N, and CK Wikle. *Statistics for Spatio-Temporal Data*. 2011.

- Cressie, Noel. *Statistics for Spatial Data*. Revised Edition edition. 1993.

If you are considering pure time series, I bet you will appreciate me with
below:

- Brockwell, Peter J., and Richard A. Davis. *Introduction to Time Series and
  Forecasting*. 2nd edition. 2010.

As a R enthusiast, theories with efficient programmable possibility are my
favorite.

- Metcalfe, Andrew V., and Paul S.P. Cowpertwait. *Introductory Time Series
  with R*. Springer New York, 2009.

- Use R!. *Applied Spatial Data Analysis with R*. Springer New York, 2008.


**Data Mining**

Data mining is a wide concept, while it is narrow to replace data analysis with
machine learning techniques these years.  Whatever, a behavior scientist should
be open to learn efficient and advanced ideas that are proposed in ML
domain. In my personal researches, I do not like the pure application of
black-box ML models in my problems, except they provide better performance and
reasonable insights into the problem. Several popular and high-quality DM/ML
books are listed. If you are not familiar with machine learning concepts, Han
et al. give a broad view:

- Han, Jiawei, and Micheline Kamber. *Data Mining Concepts and Techniques*. 2nd
  ed. 2006.

If you intend to dive into ML algorithms with deep theory, you may prefer

- Friedman, Jerome, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. *The Elements of
  Statistical Learning*. Vol. 1. 2001.

To learn the building blocks in ML algorithms and further absorb the spirit in
your own models, Bishop's work may become a bible under your pillow.

- Bishop, Christopher M. *Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning*. New York:
  Springer, 2006.

For engineering practice using ML theory, you can check

- Witten, Ian H, and Eibe Frank. Data Mining: *Practical Machine Learning Tools
  and Techniques*. 2005.


**Complex Network**

When we analyze human behavior in large scale or by coupling external factors,
network theory is a powerful tool to address problems like social analysis and
mobility pattern mining. On network theory with brief structure and beautiful
illustration, I prefer the book of Albert-László, which is currently in ebook
version,

- Albert-László, Barabási. *Network
  Science*. 2012. http://barabasi.com/networksciencebook/

When we consider the flow dynamics over networks, flow theory is also
essential.

- Ahuja, Ravindra K., Thomas L. Magnanti, and James B. Orlin. *Network Flows:
  Theory, Algorithms, and Applications*. 1st ed. 1993.


**Visualization**

Last but not least, data visualization is also important when you present
discoveries to others who are not familiar with your big problem. Clear and
accurate figures convey much information than words. One basic principle for a
beginner is that different data types have a small number of optimal
visualization forms. Outstanding figures are mostly due to a choice of
near-best presentation. From the `beautiful data`, I have learned basic design
principles from many excellent works.

- Segaran, Toby, and Jeff Hammerbacher. *Beautiful Data: The Stories Behind
  Elegant Data Solutions*. 1st ed. 2009.
